# Øvelsesopgaver til 30/11

COD: 4.1
Consider the following instruction:
Instruction: and rd, rs1, rs2
Interpretation: Reg[rd] = Reg[rs1] AND Reg[rs2]

4.1.1 What are the values of control signals generated by the control
      in Figure 4.10 for this instruction?
      ANSWER: RegWrite:      1
              ALUSrc:        0
              ALU operation: 1
              MemWrite:      0
              MentoReg:      0
              MemRead:       0

4.1.2 Which resources (blocks) perform a useful function for this
      instruction?
      ANSWER: Registers, ALU, Mux (left and right), ImmGen.

4.1.3 Which resources (blocks) produce no output for this
      instruction? Which resources produce output that is not used?
      Data memory: Since MemWrite and MemRead is false. Then there will be
      no output.
      ANSWER: Data memory and ImmGen produce no meaningful output.

COD: 4.2
Explain each of the “don’t cares” in Figure 4.22.
ANSWER: "I dont care!"

COD: 4.5
In this exercise, we examine in detail how an instruction is executed in a
single-cycle datapath. Problems in this exercise refer to a clock cycle in which the
processor fetches the following instruction word: 0x00c6ba23.
See Figure 4.14

0x00c6ba23 =    0000    0000    1100    0110    1011    1010    0010    0011

    31:24   IMM
    24:20   RS1
    19:15   rs1
    14:12   funct3
    11:07   rd
    06:00   opcode

4.5.1 What are the values of the ALU control unit’s inputs for this
      instruction?
      ANSWER:

4.5.2 What is the new PC address after this instruction is executed?
      Highlight the path through which this value is determined.
      ANSWER: PC += 4

4.5.3 For each mux, show the values of its inputs and outputs during
      the execution of this instruction. List values that are register 
      outputs at Reg [xn].
      ANSWER: 

4.5.4 What are the input values for the ALU and the two add units?

4.5.5 What are the values of all inputs for the registers unit?




COD: 4.6, 4.15

----------

Installer gcc kryds-oversætter til risc-v.
Linux: https://github.com/stnolting/riscv-gcc-prebuilt
Macos: https://github.com/riscv-software-src/homebrew-riscv

Skriv et lille C-program (gerne uden brug af I/O) og tjek
at krydsoversætteren virker.

Prøv at få "Ripes" simulatoren til at bruge krydsoversætteren,
således at du kan skrive C i Ripes editor og få det oversat
og udført på simulatoren.
